# Hash Tables

## Introduction
- Also known as Hash Maps. Hash Tables are very commonly used and built into almost every programming language in some way. For example, a Hash Table in JavaScript is called an object, while in python, it’s called a dictionary. In Java, Hash Tables are called maps and in Ruby, Hash Tables are called hashes.
- Hash Tables are used to store key-value pairs. This is like an array, where the indices would be considered keys and the elements would be considered values. In arrays, the ‘keys’ are strictly numeric and have order. In Hash Tables, the keys can be any data type and have no order.
    - Keys in JavaScript objects can technically only be strings.
- Unlike arrays, Hash Tables are fast for finding, inserting, and removing values.
## Hashing
- Computers can only read numbers, so Hash Tables need an algorithm to convert the keys, which can be strings or other data types, into numbers.
    - This type of algorithm is called a hashing algorithm.
- To understand hashing, a hash table (object) can be modeled as an array.
- Say you have an object where the keys are the names of the colors, and the values are the hexadecimal representation of that color. If you have an array with ten slots and want to store “pink” in your object, your hashing function needs to convert pink to a number between 0 and 9. It should then store they key-value pair at the index (number) generated by the function.
## Hash Functions
- A hash function is a function that accepts data of arbitrary size and maps it to an output that is fixed in size. For example, if the function accepts a string and returns a number that is n digits long, that number should be the same length if you pass the function a single character or a string with one million characters.
- Important characteristics:
    - Deterministic, meaning they give the same output given the identical input.
    - Irreversible, meaning you can’t calculate the input given the output.
    - Produce output of a fixed size.
o	Fast, allowing for fast insertion and access. Ideally, the function should be O(1).
    - Produce very different output given similar input. For example, the output of passing “hello” to the function should not have a discernable relationship to the output of passing “Hello” to the function.
- One problem a hashing function can have is a collision, where different outputs produce the same input. To help avoid collisions, you can make the length of the hash table (array) a prime number.
- Even with a large array and great hash function, collisions are inevitable. Two methods for handling collisions are separate chaining and linear probing.
- Separate Chaining involves using a more sophisticated data structure, such as another array or linked list, to store the values at a particular index when a collision occurs. For example, if you hashed “pink” and “blue” and got 4 from the hashing function, you could store those colors in a nested array at index 4.
    - When you try to access the value for “pink”, the hashing function would loop through the array stored at index 4 until it found the value for “pink.”
- Linear Probing involves looking for another empty slot in the array when a collision occurs, instead of storing more than one piece of data at an index in a nested data structure.
    - For example, if you hash “pink” and “blue” and get 4 for both. You would store “pink” at 4 and then look for an empty spot after 4 to store “blue.”
## Setting Values
-The set function should accept a key and a value, hash the key, and store the key-value pair in the hash table array using separate chaining.
-Using separate chaining means that, when the first key value pair is stored at an index, it must be stored as a nested array, where the inner array is the key-value pair and the outer array is the data structure being used to implement separate chaining.
-This allows the hashing function to store multiple values at the same index when different inputs produce the same index.
## Retrieving Values
-The get function accepts a key, hashes it, and retrieves the key-value pair in the hash table.
-Separate chaining was used to store the values in the hash table, so finding the key-value pair at an index means looping through the array to find it.
-If the key is not found in the hash table, return undefined.
## Keys and Values
•	The keys method loops through the hash table array and returns an array of the keys in the table.
•	The values method loops through the hash table array and returns an array of the values in the table. This method should only return unique values.
## Time and Space Complexity
- Insertion, Deletion, and Access in a hash table is O(1) time complexity and space complexity in average and best case. The time complexity of these operations depends largely on the performance of your hash function and how evenly it distributes the data (how many collisions it has).
- When implementing a hash table, it is best to use a hashing function that has already been built and tested. There are many libraries online that provide good hashing functions.
## Recap
- Hash Tables are collections of key-value pairs. They are implemented in almost every programming language in one form or another. In JavaScript, they are called objects and in Ruby, they are called hashes.
- Hash tables can find values quickly when given a key. They can also add and remove key-value pairs quickly.
- One way to implement a hash table is by storing key-value pairs in a large array (preferably one with a size that is a prime number) and hashing the keys. The hashed keys are numbers which act as indices to store the pairs in the array.
- A good hashing function should be fast, deterministic, and distribute keys uniformly.
- Separate chaining and linear probing are two methods used to handle collisions, where two keys hash to the same index.
